docs/user_guide/index.md, before:

# Recipe Composition

Welcome to the User Guide for the `pangeo-forge-recipes` Python package.

## File Patterns

{doc}`file_patterns` are the starting point for any Pangeo Forge recipe.
they are the raw "ingredients" upon which the recipe will act.
The point of file patterns is to describe how many individual source files are
organized logically as part of a larger dataset.

## Recipe Object

The central object in `pangeo_forge_recipes` is a {doc}``Recipe Object <recipes>``.
A Recipe Object defines how to transform data in one format / location into another format / location.
The primary way people contribute to Pangeo Forge is by writing / maintaining Recipes.
For information about how recipes work see {doc}`recipes`.
The {doc}`../tutorials/index` provide deep dives into how to develop and debug Recipes.

## Recipe Execution

There are several different ways to execute Recipes.
See {doc}`execution` for details.

## Index

```{toctree}
:maxdepth: 1
:glob:

file_patterns
recipes
storage
execution
```

Commit message:

user guide + relative links cleanup

docs/user_guide/index.md, after:

# Recipe Composition

A recipe defines how to transform data in one format / location into another format / location.

A recipe is defined as a set of composite
[Apache Beam transforms](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/programming-guide/#transforms)
applied to the data collection associated with a {doc}`file pattern <file_patterns>`.

Specifically, a recipe is a set of transforms which operate on an `FilePattern` materialized in the form
of an [`apache_beam.PCollection`](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/programming-guide/#pcollections).

To write a recipe, you define a set of transforms using a combination of built-in Apache Beam transforms,
`pangeo-forge-recipes` transforms, and your own custom transforms for data pre-processing as needed.

```{note}
The full API Reference documentation for the existing recipe `PTransform` implementations ({class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.transforms`) can be found at
{doc}`../api_reference`.
```

## Deployment

There are several different ways to execute recipes. See {doc}`../deployment` for details.

## Index

```{toctree}
:maxdepth: 1
:glob:

recipes
file_patterns
openers
storage
examples/index
```
