docs/composition/styles.md, before:

# Common styles

## Open with Xarray, write to Zarr

This recipe category uses [Xarray](http://xarray.pydata.org/) to open input files and
[Zarr](https://zarr.readthedocs.io/) as the target dataset format. Inputs can be in any
[file format Xarray can read](http://xarray.pydata.org/en/latest/user-guide/io.html),
including NetCDF, OPeNDAP, GRIB, Zarr, and, via [rasterio](https://rasterio.readthedocs.io/),
GeoTIFF and other geospatial raster formats. The target Zarr dataset will conform to the
[Xarray Zarr encoding conventions](http://xarray.pydata.org/en/latest/internals/zarr-encoding-spec.html).

```{tip}
The following example recipes are representative of this style:

- {doc}`examples/gpcp-from-gcs`
- {doc}`examples/noaa-oisst`
```

Below we give a very basic overview of how this recipe is used.

First you must define a {doc}`file pattern <file_patterns>`.
Once you have a {class}`FilePattern <pangeo_forge_recipes.patterns.FilePattern>` object,
the recipe pipeline will contain at a minimum the following transforms applied to the file pattern collection:

- {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.transforms.OpenURLWithFSSpec`: retrieves each pattern file using the specified URLs.
- {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.transforms.OpenWithXarray`: load each pattern file into an [`xarray.Dataset`](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/generated/xarray.Dataset.html).
- {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.transforms.StoreToZarr`: generate a Zarr store by combining the datasets.
- {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.transforms.ConsolidateDimensionCoordinates`: consolidate the Dimension Coordinates for dataset read performance.
- {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.transforms.ConsolidateMetadata`: calls Zarr's convinience function to consolidate metadata.

### Open existing Zarr Store

- {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.transforms.OpenWithXarray` supports opening existing Zarr stores. This might be useful for rechunking a Zarr store into an alternative chunking scheme.
  An example of this recipe can be found in - {doc}`examples/gpcp-rechunk`

```{tip}
If using the {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.transforms.ConsolidateDimensionCoordinates` transform, make sure to chain on the {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.transforms.ConsolidateMetadata` transform to your recipe.

```

```{note}
{class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.transforms.StoreToZarr` supports appending to existing Zarr stores
via the optional `append_dim` keyword argument. This option functions nearly identically to the
`append_dim` kwarg in
[`xarray.Dataset.to_zarr`](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/latest/generated/xarray.Dataset.to_zarr.html);
the two differences with this method are that Pangeo Forge will automatically introspect the inputs in
your {class}`FilePattern <pangeo_forge_recipes.patterns.FilePattern>` to determine how the existing Zarr
store dimensions need to be resized, and that writes are parallelized via Apache Beam. Apart from
ensuring that the named `append_dim` already exists in the dataset to which you are appending, use of
this option does not ensure logical consistency (e.g. contiguousness, etc.) of the appended data. When
selecting this option, it is therefore up to you, the user, to ensure that the inputs provided in the
{doc}`file pattern <file_patterns>` for the appending recipe are limited to those which you want to
append.
```

## Open with Kerchunk, write to virtual Zarr

The standard Zarr recipe creates a copy of the original dataset in the Zarr format, this
[kerchunk](https://fsspec.github.io/kerchunk/)-based reference recipe style does not copy the
data and instead creates a Kerchunk mapping, which allows archival formats (including NetCDF, GRIB2, etc.) to be read _as if_ they were Zarr datasets. More details about how Kerchunk works can be found in the
[kerchunk docs](https://fsspec.github.io/kerchunk/detail.html) and
[this blog post](https://medium.com/pangeo/fake-it-until-you-make-it-reading-goes-netcdf4-data-on-aws-s3-as-zarr-for-rapid-data-access-61e33f8fe685).

```{note}
Examples of this recipe style currently exist in development form, and will be cited here as soon as they
are integration tested, which is pending <https://github.com/pangeo-forge/pangeo-forge-recipes/issues/608>.
```

### Is this style right for my dataset?

For archival data stored on highly-throughput storage devices, and for which
preprocessing is not required, reference recipes are an ideal and storage-efficient option.
When choosing whether to create a reference recipe, it is important to consider questions such as:

#### Where are the archival (i.e. source) files for this dataset currently stored?

If the original data are not already in the cloud (or some other high-bandwidth storage device,
such as an on-prem data center), the performance benefits of using a reference recipe may be limited,
because network speeds to access the original data will constrain I/O throughput.

#### Does this dataset require preprocessing?

With reference recipes, modification of the underlying data is not possible. For example, the
chunking schema of a dataset cannot be modified with Kerchunk, so you are limited to the chunk schema of the
archival data. If you need to optimize your datasets chunking schema for space or time, the standard Zarr
recipe is the only option. While you cannot modify chunking in a reference recipe, changes in the metadata
(attributes, encoding, etc.) can be applied.

Commit message:

Updates to Zarr V3 (#788)
* updates zarr.storage.FSStore to zarr.storage.FSspecStore for Zarr v3 compatability

* bump python version and beam version

* bumped ci to 3.11

* xfailed some kerchunk tests, updated zarr codec error

* update FSSpecStore syntax

* progress on debugging

* more progress on test debugging

* resolve most of the remaining errors

* modify expected chunk paths

* use the mapper instead of the `temp_store` to verify

* enforce writing empty chunks

* [pre-commit.ci] auto fixes from pre-commit.com hooks

for more information, see https://pre-commit.ci

* only change the zarr config temporarily

* use `auto_mkdir=True`

* install `pytest-asyncio` to run async tests

* rename the `TestPipeline` class to avoid detecting it as test classes

* mark the async tests to get pytest to run them

* get `_do_target_ops` to actually run checks

* remove commented-out code

* trigger ci

* only enforce writing chunks in the tests

---------

Co-authored-by: Justus Magin <keewis@posteo.de>
Co-authored-by: pre-commit-ci[bot] <66853113+pre-commit-ci[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/composition/styles.md, after:

# Common styles

## Open with Xarray, write to Zarr

This recipe category uses [Xarray](http://xarray.pydata.org/) to open input files and
[Zarr](https://zarr.readthedocs.io/) as the target dataset format. Inputs can be in any
[file format Xarray can read](http://xarray.pydata.org/en/latest/user-guide/io.html),
including NetCDF, OPeNDAP, GRIB, Zarr, and, via [rasterio](https://rasterio.readthedocs.io/),
GeoTIFF and other geospatial raster formats. The target Zarr dataset will conform to the
[Xarray Zarr encoding conventions](http://xarray.pydata.org/en/latest/internals/zarr-encoding-spec.html).

```{tip}
The following example recipes are representative of this style:

- {doc}`examples/gpcp-from-gcs`
- {doc}`examples/noaa-oisst`
```

Below we give a very basic overview of how this recipe is used.

First you must define a {doc}`file pattern <file_patterns>`.
Once you have a {class}`FilePattern <pangeo_forge_recipes.patterns.FilePattern>` object,
the recipe pipeline will contain at a minimum the following transforms applied to the file pattern collection:

- {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.transforms.OpenURLWithFSSpec`: retrieves each pattern file using the specified URLs.
- {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.transforms.OpenWithXarray`: load each pattern file into an [`xarray.Dataset`](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/generated/xarray.Dataset.html).
- {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.transforms.StoreToZarr`: generate a Zarr store by combining the datasets.
- {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.transforms.ConsolidateDimensionCoordinates`: consolidate the Dimension Coordinates for dataset read performance.
- {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.transforms.ConsolidateMetadata`: calls Zarr's convinience function to consolidate metadata. Note. This is not supported in Zarr V3.

### Open existing Zarr Store

- {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.transforms.OpenWithXarray` supports opening existing Zarr stores. This might be useful for rechunking a Zarr store into an alternative chunking scheme.
  An example of this recipe can be found in - {doc}`examples/gpcp-rechunk`

```{tip}
If using the {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.transforms.ConsolidateDimensionCoordinates` transform, make sure to chain on the {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.transforms.ConsolidateMetadata` transform to your recipe.

```

```{note}
{class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.transforms.StoreToZarr` supports appending to existing Zarr stores
via the optional `append_dim` keyword argument. This option functions nearly identically to the
`append_dim` kwarg in
[`xarray.Dataset.to_zarr`](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/latest/generated/xarray.Dataset.to_zarr.html);
the two differences with this method are that Pangeo Forge will automatically introspect the inputs in
your {class}`FilePattern <pangeo_forge_recipes.patterns.FilePattern>` to determine how the existing Zarr
store dimensions need to be resized, and that writes are parallelized via Apache Beam. Apart from
ensuring that the named `append_dim` already exists in the dataset to which you are appending, use of
this option does not ensure logical consistency (e.g. contiguousness, etc.) of the appended data. When
selecting this option, it is therefore up to you, the user, to ensure that the inputs provided in the
{doc}`file pattern <file_patterns>` for the appending recipe are limited to those which you want to
append.
```

## Open with Kerchunk, write to virtual Zarr

The standard Zarr recipe creates a copy of the original dataset in the Zarr format, this
[kerchunk](https://fsspec.github.io/kerchunk/)-based reference recipe style does not copy the
data and instead creates a Kerchunk mapping, which allows archival formats (including NetCDF, GRIB2, etc.) to be read _as if_ they were Zarr datasets. More details about how Kerchunk works can be found in the
[kerchunk docs](https://fsspec.github.io/kerchunk/detail.html) and
[this blog post](https://medium.com/pangeo/fake-it-until-you-make-it-reading-goes-netcdf4-data-on-aws-s3-as-zarr-for-rapid-data-access-61e33f8fe685).

```{note}
Examples of this recipe style currently exist in development form, and will be cited here as soon as they
are integration tested, which is pending <https://github.com/pangeo-forge/pangeo-forge-recipes/issues/608>.
```

### Is this style right for my dataset?

For archival data stored on highly-throughput storage devices, and for which
preprocessing is not required, reference recipes are an ideal and storage-efficient option.
When choosing whether to create a reference recipe, it is important to consider questions such as:

#### Where are the archival (i.e. source) files for this dataset currently stored?

If the original data are not already in the cloud (or some other high-bandwidth storage device,
such as an on-prem data center), the performance benefits of using a reference recipe may be limited,
because network speeds to access the original data will constrain I/O throughput.

#### Does this dataset require preprocessing?

With reference recipes, modification of the underlying data is not possible. For example, the
chunking schema of a dataset cannot be modified with Kerchunk, so you are limited to the chunk schema of the
archival data. If you need to optimize your datasets chunking schema for space or time, the standard Zarr
recipe is the only option. While you cannot modify chunking in a reference recipe, changes in the metadata
(attributes, encoding, etc.) can be applied.
