docs/pangeo_forge_recipes/recipe_user_guide/execution.md, before:

# Recipe Execution

There are many different types of Pangeo Forge recipes.
However, **all recipes are executed the same way**!
This is a key part of the Pangeo Forge design.

Once you have created a recipe object (see {doc}`recipes`) you have two
options for executing it. In the subsequent code, we will assume that a
recipe has already been initialized in the variable `recipe`.


## Recipe Executors

```{note}
API reference documentation for execution can be found in {mod}`pangeo_forge_recipes.executors`.
```

A recipe is an abstract description of a transformation pipeline.
Recipes can be _compiled_ to executable objects.
We currently support three types of compilation.

### Python Function

To compile a recipe to a single python function, use the method `.to_function()`.
For example

```{code-block} python
recipe_func = recipe.to_function()
recipe_func()  # actually execute the recipe
```

Note that the python function approach does not support parallel or distributed execution.
It's mostly just a convenience utility.

### Beam PTransform

You can compile your recipe to an Apache Beam [PTransform](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/programming-guide/#transforms)
to be used within a [Pipeline](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/programming-guide/#creating-a-pipeline) using the
:meth:`BaseRecipe.to_beam()` method. For example

```{code-block} python
import apache_beam as beam

with beam.Pipeline() as p:
   p | recipe.to_beam()
```

By default the pipeline runs using Beam's [DirectRunner](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/runners/direct/).
See [runners](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/#runners) for more.

Commit message:

Port Recipes User Guide to `beam-refactor` (#499)
* WIP "Recipes" (#483)

* Full draft of Beam port of "Recipes User Guide" (#483)

* [pre-commit.ci] auto fixes from pre-commit.com hooks

for more information, see https://pre-commit.ci

* Updated following review comments, and some minor additional edits to Recipes (#483)

* Updated following review comments, and restored link to OPenDAP notebook (#483)

* [pre-commit.ci] auto fixes from pre-commit.com hooks

for more information, see https://pre-commit.ci

---------

Co-authored-by: pre-commit-ci[bot] <66853113+pre-commit-ci[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/pangeo_forge_recipes/recipe_user_guide/execution.md, after:

# Recipe Execution

There are many different types of Pangeo Forge recipes.
However, **all recipes are executed the same way**!
This is a key part of the Pangeo Forge design.

Once you have created a recipe object (see {doc}`recipes`) you have two
options for executing it. In the subsequent code, we will assume that a
recipe has already been initialized in the variable `recipe`.


## Recipe Executors

A recipe is an abstract description of a transformation pipeline.
We currently support the following execution mechanism.

### Beam PTransform

A recipe is defined as a [pipeline](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/programming-guide/#creating-a-pipeline) of [Apache Beam transforms](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/programming-guide/#transforms) applied to the data collection associated with a {doc}`file pattern <file_patterns>`. Specifically, each recipe pipeline contains a set of transforms that operate on an `apache_beam.PCollection`, applying the specified transformation from input to output elements. Having created a transforms pipeline (see {doc}`recipes`}, it may be executed with Beam as follows:

```{code-block} python
import apache_beam as beam

with beam.Pipeline() as p:
    p | transforms
```

By default the pipeline runs using Beam's [DirectRunner](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/runners/direct/), which is useful during recipe development. However, alternative Beam runners are available, for example:
* [FlinkRunner](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/runners/flink/): execute Beam pipelines using [Apache Flink](https://flink.apache.org/).
* [DataflowRunner](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/runners/dataflow/): uses the [Google Cloud Dataflow managed service](https://cloud.google.com/dataflow/service/dataflow-service-desc).
* [DaskRunner](https://beam.apache.org/releases/pydoc/current/apache_beam.runners.dask.dask_runner.html): executes pipelines via [Dask.distributed](https://distributed.dask.org/en/stable/).

See [here](https://beam.apache.org/documentation/#runners) for details of the available Beam runners.
