docs/pangeo_forge_recipes/recipe_user_guide/recipes.md, before:

# Recipes

A recipe defines how to transform data in one format / location into another format / location.
The primary way people contribute to Pangeo Forge is by writing / maintaining recipes.

```{warning}
The Recipe API is still in flux and may change. Make sure the version of the documentation
you are reading matches your installed version of pangeo_forge_recipes.
```

## The Recipe Object

A Recipe is a Python object which encapsulates a workflow for transforming data.
A Recipe knows how to take a {class}`file pattern <pangeo_forge_recipes.patterns.FilePattern>`,
which describes a collection of source files ("inputs"),
and turn it into a single analysis-ready, cloud-optimized dataset.
Creating a recipe does not actually cause any data to be read or written; the
recipe is just the _description_ of the transformation.
To actually do the work, the recipe must be {doc}`executed <execution>`.
Recipe authors (i.e. data users or data managers) can either execute their recipes
on their own computers and infrastructure, in private, or make a {doc}`../../pangeo_forge_cloud/recipe_contribution`
to {doc}`../../pangeo_forge_cloud/index`, which allows the recipe to be automatically by via [Bakeries](../../pangeo_forge_cloud/core_concepts.md).

## Recipe Classes

To write a recipe, you must start from one of the existing recipe classes.
Recipe classes are based on a specific data model for the input files and target dataset format.
Right now, there are two distinct recipe classes implemented.
In the future, we may add more.

TODO add rubric for choosing a recipe class.

### XarrayZarr Recipe

```{note}
The full API Reference documentation for this recipe class can be found at
{class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.recipes.XarrayZarrRecipe`
```

The {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.recipes.XarrayZarrRecipe` recipe class uses
[Xarray](http://xarray.pydata.org/) to read the input files and
[Zarr](https://zarr.readthedocs.io/) as the target dataset format.
The inputs can be in any [file format Xarray can read](http://xarray.pydata.org/en/latest/user-guide/io.html),
including NetCDF, OPeNDAP, GRIB, Zarr, and, via [rasterio](https://rasterio.readthedocs.io/),
GeoTIFF and other geospatial raster formats.
The target Zarr dataset can be written to any storage location supported
by [filesystem-spec](https://filesystem-spec.readthedocs.io/); see {doc}`storage`
for more details.
The target Zarr dataset will conform to the
[Xarray Zarr encoding conventions](http://xarray.pydata.org/en/latest/internals/zarr-encoding-spec.html).

The best way to really understand how recipes work is to go through the relevant
tutorials for this recipe class. These are, in order of increasing complexity

- {doc}`../tutorials/xarray_zarr/netcdf_zarr_sequential`
- {doc}`../tutorials/xarray_zarr/cmip6-recipe`
- {doc}`../tutorials/xarray_zarr/multi_variable_recipe`
- {doc}`../tutorials/xarray_zarr/terraclimate`
- {doc}`../tutorials/xarray_zarr/opendap_subset_recipe`

Below we give a very basic overview of how this recipe is used.

First you must define a {doc}`file pattern <file_patterns>`.
Once you have a {class}`file pattern <pangeo_forge_recipes.patterns.FilePattern>` object,
initializing an `XarrayZarrRecipe` can be as simple as this.

```{code-block} python
recipe = XarrayZarrRecipe(file_pattern)
```

There are many other options we could pass, all covered in the API documentation
{class}`below <pangeo_forge_recipes.recipes.XarrayZarrRecipe>`.

All recipes need {doc}`storage <storage>` for the target dataset.
If you have already defined a {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.storage.FSSpecTarget` object,
then you can either assign it when you initialize the recipe or later, e.g.

```{code-block} python
recipe.target = FSSpecTarget(fs=fs, root_path=target_path)
```

This recipe may also requires a cache, a place to store temporary
files. We can create one as follows.

```{code-block} python
recipe.input_cache = CacheFSSpecTarget(fs=fs, root_path=cache_path)
```

Once your recipe is defined and has its targets assigned, you're ready to
move on to {doc}`execution`.

The API documentation below explains all of the possible options for `XarrayZarrRecipe`.
Many of these options are explored further in the {doc}`../tutorials/index`.


### HDF Reference Recipe

```{note}
The full API Reference documentation for this recipe class can be found at
{class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.recipes.HDFReferenceRecipe`
```

Like the `XarrayZarrRecipe`, this recipe allows us to more efficiently access data from a bunch of NetCDF / HDF files.
However, this recipe does not actually copy the original source data.
Instead, it generates metadata files which reference and index the original data, allowing it to be accessed more quickly and easily.
For more background, see [this blog post](https://medium.com/pangeo/fake-it-until-you-make-it-reading-goes-netcdf4-data-on-aws-s3-as-zarr-for-rapid-data-access-61e33f8fe685).

There is currently one tutorial for this recipe:

- {doc}`../tutorials/hdf_reference/reference_cmip6`

Commit message:

soften warning about recipes API changes to note

docs/pangeo_forge_recipes/recipe_user_guide/recipes.md, after:

# Recipes

A recipe defines how to transform data in one format / location into another format / location.
The primary way people contribute to Pangeo Forge is by writing / maintaining recipes.

```{note}
The Recipe API is under active development and may change. Make sure the version of the documentation you are reading matches your installed version of `pangeo-forge-recipes`. All released versions of `pangeo-forge-recipes` are supported in {doc}`../../pangeo_forge_cloud/index`. If you are starting a new recipe development cycle, it is recommend that you use the latest released version.
```

## The Recipe Object

A Recipe is a Python object which encapsulates a workflow for transforming data.
A Recipe knows how to take a {doc}`file pattern <file_patterns>`, which describes a collection of source files ("inputs"),
and turn it into a single analysis-ready, cloud-optimized dataset.
Creating a recipe does not actually cause any data to be read or written; the
recipe is just the _description_ of the transformation.
To actually do the work, the recipe must be {doc}`executed <execution>`.
Recipe authors (i.e. data users or data managers) can either execute their recipes
on their own computers and infrastructure, in private, or make a {doc}`../../pangeo_forge_cloud/recipe_contribution`
to {doc}`../../pangeo_forge_cloud/index`, which allows the recipe to be automatically by via [Bakeries](../../pangeo_forge_cloud/core_concepts.md).

## Recipe Classes

To write a recipe, you must start from one of the existing recipe classes.
Recipe classes are based on a specific data model for the input files and target dataset format.
Right now, there are two distinct recipe classes implemented.
In the future, we may add more.

TODO add rubric for choosing a recipe class.

### XarrayZarr Recipe

```{note}
The full API Reference documentation for this recipe class can be found at
{class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.recipes.XarrayZarrRecipe`
```

The {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.recipes.XarrayZarrRecipe` recipe class uses
[Xarray](http://xarray.pydata.org/) to read the input files and
[Zarr](https://zarr.readthedocs.io/) as the target dataset format.
The inputs can be in any [file format Xarray can read](http://xarray.pydata.org/en/latest/user-guide/io.html),
including NetCDF, OPeNDAP, GRIB, Zarr, and, via [rasterio](https://rasterio.readthedocs.io/),
GeoTIFF and other geospatial raster formats.
The target Zarr dataset can be written to any storage location supported
by [filesystem-spec](https://filesystem-spec.readthedocs.io/); see {doc}`storage`
for more details.
The target Zarr dataset will conform to the
[Xarray Zarr encoding conventions](http://xarray.pydata.org/en/latest/internals/zarr-encoding-spec.html).

The best way to really understand how recipes work is to go through the relevant
tutorials for this recipe class. These are, in order of increasing complexity

- {doc}`../tutorials/xarray_zarr/netcdf_zarr_sequential`
- {doc}`../tutorials/xarray_zarr/cmip6-recipe`
- {doc}`../tutorials/xarray_zarr/multi_variable_recipe`
- {doc}`../tutorials/xarray_zarr/terraclimate`
- {doc}`../tutorials/xarray_zarr/opendap_subset_recipe`

Below we give a very basic overview of how this recipe is used.

First you must define a {doc}`file pattern <file_patterns>`.
Once you have a {class}`file pattern <pangeo_forge_recipes.patterns.FilePattern>` object,
initializing an `XarrayZarrRecipe` can be as simple as this.

```{code-block} python
recipe = XarrayZarrRecipe(file_pattern)
```

There are many other options we could pass, all covered in the API documentation
{class}`below <pangeo_forge_recipes.recipes.XarrayZarrRecipe>`.

All recipes need {doc}`storage <storage>` for the target dataset.
If you have already defined a {class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.storage.FSSpecTarget` object,
then you can either assign it when you initialize the recipe or later, e.g.

```{code-block} python
recipe.target = FSSpecTarget(fs=fs, root_path=target_path)
```

This recipe may also requires a cache, a place to store temporary
files. We can create one as follows.

```{code-block} python
recipe.input_cache = CacheFSSpecTarget(fs=fs, root_path=cache_path)
```

Once your recipe is defined and has its targets assigned, you're ready to
move on to {doc}`execution`.

The API documentation below explains all of the possible options for `XarrayZarrRecipe`.
Many of these options are explored further in the {doc}`../tutorials/index`.


### HDF Reference Recipe

```{note}
The full API Reference documentation for this recipe class can be found at
{class}`pangeo_forge_recipes.recipes.HDFReferenceRecipe`
```

Like the `XarrayZarrRecipe`, this recipe allows us to more efficiently access data from a bunch of NetCDF / HDF files.
However, this recipe does not actually copy the original source data.
Instead, it generates metadata files which reference and index the original data, allowing it to be accessed more quickly and easily.
For more background, see [this blog post](https://medium.com/pangeo/fake-it-until-you-make-it-reading-goes-netcdf4-data-on-aws-s3-as-zarr-for-rapid-data-access-61e33f8fe685).

There is currently one tutorial for this recipe:

- {doc}`../tutorials/hdf_reference/reference_cmip6`
