docs/installation.md, before:

# Installing Pangeo Forge Recipes

## Local installation

To get set up Pangeo Forge you'll need to install the `pangeo-forge-recipes` library. The recommended way to do that is with `conda`.

`conda install -c conda-forge pangeo-forge-recipes`

If you have not added the conda forge channel or set it as your default channel and you would liek to do so you can use the following commands:

`conda config --add channels conda-forge`
`conda config --set channel_priority strict`

If those steps are complete you can install the library with `conda install pangeo-forge-recipes`.

## Pangeo Forge Sandbox

Pangeo Forge also has a [code sandbox](https://github.com/pangeo-forge/sandbox) accessible online. The sandbox is an environment with `pangeo-forge-recipes` installed and template documents for creating a recipe. There are two versions of this environment:
1. A Template Workspace
The template workspace contains template files for creating and submitting a recipe.
Click the button below to launch the template workspace using Binder:

Note: incorrect link
[![Binder](https://mybinder.org/badge_logo.svg)](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/pangeo-forge/sandbox/binder)

2. A Blank Environment
The blank environment is a JupyterLab environment with a blank notebook.
Click the button below to launch the blank environment using Binder:

Note: incorrect link
[![Binder](https://mybinder.org/badge_logo.svg)](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/pangeo-forge/sandbox/binder)

Either can be used to start building recipes!

You'll also notice that the {doc}`tutorials/index` have Binder links. The binder links can be used to explore the recipe tutorials without setting up a local environment.

Commit message:

shorten text and link to sandbox

docs/installation.md, after:

# Installing Pangeo Forge Recipes

## Local installation

To get set up Pangeo Forge you'll need to install the `pangeo-forge-recipes` library. The recommended way to do that is with `conda`.

`conda install -c conda-forge pangeo-forge-recipes`

If you have not added the conda forge channel or set it as your default channel and you would liek to do so you can use the following commands:

`conda config --add channels conda-forge`
`conda config --set channel_priority strict`

If those steps are complete you can install the library with `conda install pangeo-forge-recipes`.

## Pangeo Forge Sandbox

Pangeo Forge also has a [code sandbox](https://github.com/pangeo-forge/sandbox) accessible online! The sandbox is an environment with `pangeo-forge-recipes` installed and template documents for creating a recipe. Links to both a Template work environment and a blank work environment with `pangeo-forge-recipes` installed are available in the [sandbox README](https://github.com/pangeo-forge/sandbox/blob/main/README.md).

You'll also notice that the {doc}`tutorials/index` have Binder links. The binder links can be used to explore the recipe tutorials without setting up a local environment.
